README.md, before:

# PEX - Process Explorer for Linux 

A Linux process explorer similar to Windows Process Explorer.

## Why

I needed a one-off tool that would show me alltogether a process tree (think of pstree, ps -ef --forest or htop) but combined with network info. In Windows I'm using (since it appeared actually) Process Explorer and did not find anything alike for \*ix. Even though I am a FreeBSD and Solaris evangelist, this time it is for Debian Linux + Wayland only.

It is AI generated code, it is a one-off project, not sure it makes sense to continue it, I needed it once and found it useful to have it on my computer.

## Screenshot

![pex-screenshot.png](pex-screenshot.png)

## Requirements

Debian, Wayland, libxkb, ...

## Building

### Linux (works)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/rezdm/pex.git && cd pex
mkdir build && cd build
cmake .. -DPEX_PLATFORM=linux
make -j$(nproc)
```

### Other (needs implementation)
```bash
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=linux    # Linux and procfs                                                                                             
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=freebsd  # FreeBSD                                                                                         
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=solaris  # Solaris                                                                                           
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=stub     # Stub (default on other platforms)                                                                                    
```

## Installing
```bash
#git clone...
cd pex
mkdir build && cd build && cmake .. && make -j$(nproc)
```
Copy pex executable and pex.png to a folder of choice and set capabilities:
```bash
sudo setcap 'cap_sys_ptrace,cap_dac_read_search,cap_kill+ep' {path-to-executable-location}/pex
```

May be create .desktop file for GNOME:
```
[Desktop Entry]
Name=PEX
Comment=Process Explorer for Linux
Exec=pex
Icon=pex
Terminal=false
Type=Application
Categories=System;Monitor;
Keywords=process;monitor;system;task;manager;
```

Add this pex.desktop to ~/.local/share/applications/

For the icon to appear in app menus:
```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor/256x256/apps
cp {path-to-proect source}/pex.png ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor/256x256/apps/pex.png
update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications/
```

Makes sense to crop/resize original logo into destination (with ImageMagic):
```bash
convert {path-to-project-source}/pex-logo.png -gravity center -crop 800x800+0+0 +repage -resize 256x256 {path-to-installation-folder/pex.png 
```

I am considering adding this to start it the same way as in Windows:
```bash
gsettings set org.gnome.settings-daemon.plugins.media-keys custom-keybindings "['/org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/']"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/name "'PEX'"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/command "'$HOME/projects/pex/pex.cpp/build/pex'"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/binding "'<Control><Shift>Escape'"
```

Commit message:

Add Solaris implementation #22 ; Add FreeBSD implementation #21 ; Platform Indicator #32

README.md, after:

# PEX - Process Explorer for Linux 

A Linux process explorer similar to Windows Process Explorer.

## Why

I needed a one-off tool that would show me alltogether a process tree (think of pstree, ps -ef --forest or htop) but combined with network info. In Windows I'm using (since it appeared actually) Process Explorer and did not find anything alike for \*ix. Even though I am a FreeBSD and Solaris evangelist, this time it is for Debian Linux + Wayland only.

It is AI generated code, it is a one-off project, not sure it makes sense to continue it, I needed it once and found it useful to have it on my computer.

## Screenshot

![pex-screenshot.png](pex-screenshot.png)

## Requirements

Debian, Wayland, libxkb, ...

## Building

### Linux (works)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/rezdm/pex.git && cd pex
mkdir build && cd build
cmake .. -DPEX_PLATFORM=linux
make -j$(nproc)
```

### Other (works, but not thoroughly tested through daily usage)
```bash
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=freebsd  # FreeBSD
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=solaris  # Solaris
  -DPEX_PLATFORM=stub     # Stub (default on other platforms)
```

#### FreeBSD
I am using `pex` in FreeBSD 15-RELEASE, with XFCE, X11 in VirtualBox 7.2. Seems to work -- shows all that I need

#### Solaris
I am testing `pex` on Solaris 11.4 CBE, with GNOME, X11 in VirtualBox 7.2. Works, but with an additional step, some workaround for libX11 limitation. libX11 itself resolves fine, but GLFW is reporting "Failed to load Xlib" likely because it can not `dlopen("libX11.so.6")` (hard-coded by GLFW) but my Solaris installation provides libX11.so.4. I did:
```bash
# cd pex/build...
mkdir lib
ln -s /usr/lib/64/libX11.so.4 ./lib/libX11.so.6
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PWD/lib ./pex
```
This is not correct, but at least allowes to test.
Make make it possible to regular users to see properties of other's users processes, instead of `setcap` from Linux, in Solaris it would be something along
```bash
username=user_x
# su...
# printf '%s\n' 'Pex Monitor:::Run pex with process/FD/network read privileges:::' >> /etc/security/prof_attr
# grep -n "Pex Monitor" /etc/security/prof_attr
# getent prof_attr "Pex Monitor"
# usermod -P +"Pex Monitor" user_x
# profiles rezdm | grep "Pex Monitor"
...
$ pfexec pex
```

## Installing
```bash
#git clone...
cd pex
mkdir build && cd build && cmake .. && make -j$(nproc)
```
Copy pex executable and pex.png to a folder of choice and set capabilities:
```bash
sudo setcap 'cap_sys_ptrace,cap_dac_read_search,cap_kill+ep' {path-to-executable-location}/pex
```

May be create .desktop file for GNOME:
```
[Desktop Entry]
Name=PEX
Comment=Process Explorer for Linux
Exec=pex
Icon=pex
Terminal=false
Type=Application
Categories=System;Monitor;
Keywords=process;monitor;system;task;manager;
```

Add this pex.desktop to ~/.local/share/applications/

For the icon to appear in app menus:
```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor/256x256/apps
cp {path-to-proect source}/pex.png ~/.local/share/icons/hicolor/256x256/apps/pex.png
update-desktop-database ~/.local/share/applications/
```

Makes sense to crop/resize original logo into destination (with ImageMagic):
```bash
convert {path-to-project-source}/pex-logo.png -gravity center -crop 800x800+0+0 +repage -resize 256x256 {path-to-installation-folder/pex.png 
```

I am considering adding this to start it the same way as in Windows:
```bash
gsettings set org.gnome.settings-daemon.plugins.media-keys custom-keybindings "['/org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/']"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/name "'PEX'"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/command "'$HOME/projects/pex/pex.cpp/build/pex'"
dconf write /org/gnome/settings-daemon/plugins/media-keys/custom-keybindings/pex/binding "'<Control><Shift>Escape'"
```
